Plastic mulch is often used in cucurbit production, but it has negative soil health and environmental implications due to use of tillage for installation and generation of plastic waste.
This 2-year study aimed to find a viable alternative to plastic mulch through the use of strip tillage and rowcovers, as rowcovers could help minimize yield loss from strip tillage by providing warmer air and soil as well as providing insect protection.
A split-plot design was used in both conventionally and organically managed summer squash (Cucurbita pepo), with production system as the whole-plot factor [conventional tillage with black plastic mulch also referred to as plasticulture (PL) and strip tillage into rolled cereal rye (Secale cereale) (ST)] and rowcover use as the subplot factor (rowcover until anthesis or no rowcover).
Rowcovers reduced the incidence of squash vine borer (Melittia cucurbitae) and eliminated the need for insecticide sprays to control this insect pest, but did not reduce the incidence of yellow vine decline or the sprays needed to control squash bug (Anasa tristis).
Rowcovers increased average air temperature by 1.6 to 4.0 degrees C and increased maximum air temperature by up to 10.3 degrees C.
Rowcovers decreased average light intensity by 33% to 39%.
Though soil temperature in PL tended to be higher than in ST, in 1-year rowcovers helped bridge the gap.
Plant biomass was consistently higher in the PL than the ST system.
Averaged across rowcover treatments, plants in PL had higher marketable yields than those in ST; however, the use of rowcovers often led to comparable yields between the production system treatments.
Rowcover was a significant factor explaining marketable yield for the organically managed fields both years.
There was no consistent effect of production system on soil microbial biomass carbon (MBC).
Based on our results, strip tillage into rolled rye could be a viable alternative to plasticulture for summer squash production in Iowa, and rowcovers could help increase yields in ST especially in an organic management system.
