The round melon Praecitrullus fistulosus (Stocks) Pangalo has been cultivated in Asia since ancient times and has been considered an underexploited crop in the western world.
In the USA, there is an increased interest in using P.
fistulosus as a commercial vegetable, and possibly as a rootstock for grafting watermelon, melon, or cucumber.
However, the taxonomic classification of P.
fistulosus is incomplete and for many years it has been considered a close relative of watermelon [Citrullus lanatus subsp.
vulgaris (Schrad.
ex Eckl.
et Zeyh.) Fursa] and was previously classified as Citrullus lanatus subsp.
fistulosus (Stocks) Duthie et J.B.
Fuller.
Here, we used two sets of DNA markers to assess the genetic similarity of P.
fistulosus in relation to Citrullus spp.
{including Citrullus lanatus subsp.
vulgaris, C.
lanatus subsp.
lanatus, Citroides group [also known as C.
lanatus (Thunb.) Matsum.
et Nakai subsp.
lanatus var.
citroides (Bailey) Mansf.
ex Greb.], and C.
colocynthis (L.) Schrad.}, Cucumis spp.
(including C.
melo, C.
sativus, C.
anguria, C.
meeusei, C.
zeyheri), Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn., Lagenaria siceraria (Mol.) Standl.
and Cucurbita spp.
(including C.
moschata Duchesne and the winter squash C.
maxima Duchesne).
The first marker set comprised 501 markers that were produced by 38 primer pairs derived from watermelon expressed sequenced tags (ESTs) containing simple sequence repeat (SSR) motifs (designated as EST-SSR primers; produced 311 markers), and by 18 primer pairs derived from ESTs that do not contain SSR motives (designated here as EST-PCR primers; produced 190 markers).
The second marker set comprised 628 markers that were produced by 18 sequence related amplified polymorphism (SRAP) primer pairs.
The phylogenetic data indicated that among these cucurbit species, the wax gourd B.
hispida is the closest to the P.
fistulosus.
Pollen observations, using light microscopy, indicated that each of the cucurbit genera examined here has unique pollen morphology.
The Cucurbita spp.
have globular pollen grains with a stigmatic surface.
The L.
siceraria has polygonal pollen grains with symmetrical boundaries, while the Citrullus spp.
and Cucumis spp.
have ovular (conical) and triangular shaped pollen grains (respectively).
The B.
hispida and P.
fistulosus have spherical or semispherical pollen grains.
These pollen features appear to be in agreement with the phylogenetic relationships of these two species based on DNA markers.
Analysis with 12 SRAP primer pairs revealed low genetic diversity among 18 United States Plant Introductions (PIs) of P.
fistulosus, indicating the need to expand the germplasm collection of this cucurbit crop.
