In the early 1890s, a mysterious wilt disease of watermelon caused heavy losses in the southern United States.
E.F.
Smith did seminal research on what became only the second plant wilt disease, described as Fusarium wilt of watermelon, caused by the soilborne fungus Fusarium oxysporum f.
sp.
niveum.
Within a few years, Smith characterized and named the casual agent, established its pathogenicity and host specificity, and performed detailed histological studies on the transport of microconidia within the xylem and the formation of "embolisms" (tyloses), a characteristic later shown to be common to all Fusarium vascular wilts.
Almost immediately, W.A.
Orton began hybridization studies to develop a wilt-resistant watermelon cultivar; a concept that at the time was not fully embraced by the scientific community.
Over the ensuing decades, numerous breeders improved upon wilt-resistant cultivars and, by the 1950s, the disease was well controlled throughout much of the United States and other countries.
Resistance, however, was not universal and, in some areas, cultivars succumbed to wilt.
Physiological specialization (races) of F.
oxysporum f.
sp.
niveum was investigated as early as 1934, as well as host specificity and the concept of formae speciales (f.
sp.).
The appearance of new races has been a subject of great interest for years.
Methods to identify and distinguish among the various formae speciales and races, including vegetative compatibility and numerous molecular techniques, continue to generate interest, although inoculation of differential cultivars is still the primary means of identifying pathogenic isolates and races.
F.
oxysporum f.
sp.
niveum was one of the first Fusarium wilt pathogens to be associated with seed, a problem that still exists today.
Numerous control strategies have been investigated over the last 120 years and include nutritional, chemical, cultural, grafting, and other biological methods, but none has replaced genetic resistance as the preferred method of control.
Recent research has focused on several main areas, including a better understanding of the determinants of virulence, mechanisms of wilt resistance, sequencing and mapping the watermelon genome, and the development of race 2-resistant varieties.
Additional investigations into histological, molecular, genetic, and biochemical mechanisms of resistance and susceptibility are improving our understanding of this tenacious disease.
While it has been 120 years since Smith first described the disease, it continues to cause significant economic losses around the world.
Fusarium wilt of watermelon occurs on every continent except Antarctica and, arguably, is the most economically important disease of watermelon globally.
