Cucurbit crops are economically important worldwide.
One of the most serious threats to cucurbit production is Zucchini yellow mosaic virus (ZYMV).
Several resistant accessions were identified in Cucurbita moschata and their resistance was introgressed into Cucurbita pepo.
However, the mode of inheritance of ZYMV resistance in C.
pepo presents a great challenge to attempts at introgressing resistance into elite germplasm.
The main goal of this work was to analyze the inheritance of ZYMV resistance and to identify markers associated with genes conferring resistance.
An Illumina GoldenGate assay allowed us to assess polymorphism among nine squash genotypes and to discover six polymorphic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between two near-isogenic lines, "True French" (susceptible to ZYMV) and Accession 381e (resistant to ZYMV).
Two F-2 and three BC1 populations obtained from crossing the ZYMV-resistant Accession 381e with two susceptible ones, the zucchini True French and the cocozelle "San Pasquale," were assayed for ZYMV resistance.
Molecular analysis revealed an approximately 90% association between SNP1 and resistance, which was confirmed using High Resolution Melt (HRM) and a CAPS marker.
Co-segregation up to 72% in populations segregating for resistance was observed for two other SNP markers that could be potentially linked to genes involved in resistance expression.
A functional prediction of proteins involved in the resistance response was performed on genome scaffolds containing the three SNPs of interest.
Indeed, 16 full-length pathogen recognition genes (PRGs) were identified around the three SNP markers.
In particular, we discovered that two nucleotide-binding site leucine-rich repeat (NBS-LRR) protein-encoding genes were located near the SNP1 marker.
The investigation of ZYMV resistance in squash populations and the genomic analysis performed in this work could be useful for better directing the introgression of disease resistance into elite C.
pepo germplasm.
