Phytophthora blight or crown or root rot (Phytophthora capsici Leonian) is an important disease of a wide range of plant species including peppers, tomatoes, cucumbers and other cucurbits in Canada and worldwide.
We have previously demonstrated the effectiveness of a new liquid formulation of AG3 phosphonate (Calirus 150, Bromine Compounds Ltd., Beer Sheva, Israel) in suppressing pythium damping-off of cucumbers and clubroot of bok choy and cabbage.
In this study, the effectiveness of AG3 phosphonate formulation to suppress phytophthora damping-off and root rot of cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) seedlings or phytophthora blight of bell pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) plants was determined in a peat-based mix or sandy-loam soil artificially infested with soil inoculum of P.
capsici under growth room conditions.
In an infested peat-based mix, AG3 phosphonate preplanting amendment or postplanting drench treatments (0.05%, 0.1% and 0.2% a.i.) and a 10-min seed-soak treatment (10.45% a.i.) significantly increased the percentage of healthy cucumber seedlings and reduced damping-off and root rot severity.
The seed-soak and 0.2% treatments were the most effective treatments that consistently suppressed damping-off and root rot of cucumber even in a peat-based mix infested with high inoculum levels of P.
capsici.
Disease severity on cucumber plants was also significantly less in the AG3 phosphonate treatments.
The single drench applications of AG3 phosphonate (0.05%, 0.1% and 0.2% a.i.) significantly reduced the incidence and severity of phytophthora blight of bell pepper plants in an infested peat-based mix or a sandy-loam soil compared with the control plants receiving no treatment.
The best control of phytophthora blight of bell pepper was achieved with the higher rate (0.2% a.i.) in both peat-based mix and soil with 90% of the plants remaining healthy compared with none in the control.
The disease protection increased with increasing concentrations of AG3 phosphonate in both bell peppers and cucumbers without any phytotoxicity.
