Most melon (Cucumis melo L.) breeding lines in South Korea display andromonoecious sex expression, which necessitates laborious hand emasculation during F-1 hybrid seed production.
Thus, there is a need to develop monoecious sex types in elite germplasm to obviate self-pollination.
Sex expression is associated with floral ethylene production, which, in monecious melon plants, is associated with the A locus.
Our study was conducted to develop molecular markers for selection of monoecious plants based on sequence variation inherent in the CmACS-7 gene [encoding 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid synthase (ACS)] that is associated with ethylene production.
Full-length CmACS-7 sequences were cloned from a monoecious (MO23) and an andromonoecious (AM24) line.
The alignment of those CmACS-7 sequences revealed a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP; C170T) in exon 1 and an 18 bp indel in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of between MO23 and AM24, which was then used to develop a cleaved amplified polymorphic sequence (CAPS) (EX1-C170T) and a sequence characterized amplified region (SCAR) marker (T1ex), respectively.
The sex expression and the T1ex SCAR-based genotype of 442 F-2 plants derived from a MO23 x AM24 cross was determined.
Monoecy and andromonoecy segregated in a 3:1 ratio in F-2 progeny, where the sex type of 429 plants (13 plants not classified) co-segregated with the SCAR marker, demonstrating that sex expression regulated by CmACS-7 is controlled by a single dominant gene and that it confers monoecy in line MO23.
Allelic variation in 112 geographically diverse melon lines for CmACS-7 as accessed by CAPS EX1-C170T and SCAR T1ex markers indicated that the: 1) exon 1 of CmACS-7 is highly conserved and the SNP/sex expression association detected is highly predictable making it potentially useful for marker-based selection of monoecious plants, and; 2) 18 bp indel mutation in the 3'-UTR was present in various lengths depending on different monoecious melon germplasm.
