Grafting watermelon (Citrullus lanatus) is a common practice in many parts of the world and has recently received increased interest in the United States.
The present study was designed to evaluate early season growth, yield, and fruit quality of watermelon in response to grafting and in the absence of known disease pressure in a fumigated system.
Field experiments were conducted using standard and mini watermelons (cv.
Exclamation and Extazy, respectively) grafted onto 20 commercially available cucurbit rootstocks representing four species: giant pumpkin (Cucurbita maxima), summer squash (Cucurbita pepo), bottle gourd (Lngenaria siceraria), and interspecific hybrid squash [ISH ( C.
maxima x Cucurbita moschata)].
Nongrafted 'Exclamation' and 'Extazy' were included as controls.
To determine early season growth, leaf area was measured at 1, 2, and 3 weeks after transplant (WAT).
At 1 WAT, nongrafted 'Exclamation' produced the smallest leaf area; however, at 3 WAT, nongrafted 'Exclamation' produced the largest leaf area in 2015, and no differences were observed in 2016.
Leaf area was very similar among rootstocks in the `Extazy' study, with minimal differences observed.
Marketable yield included fruit weighing >= 9 and >= 3 lb for 'Exclamation' and 'Extazy', respectively.
In the 'Exclamation' study, highest marketable yields were observed in nongrafted 'Exclamation', and 'Exclamation' grafted to 'Pelops', 'TZ148', and `Coloso', and lowest marketable yields were observed when using 'Marvel' and 'Kazako' rootstocks, which produced 47% and 32% of nongrafted 'Exclamation' yield, respectively.
In the `Extazy' study, the highest marketable yield was observed in nongrafted 'Extazy', and 'Kazako' produced the lowest yields (48% of nongrafted `Extazy').
Fruit quality was determined by measuring fruit acidity (pH), soluble solids concentration (SSC), lycopene content, and flesh firmness from a sample of two fruit from each plot from the initial two harvests of each year.
Across both studies, rootstock had no effect on SSC or lycopene content.
As reported in previous studies, flesh firmness was increased as a result of grafting, and nongrafted `Exclamation' and `Extazy' had the lowest flesh firmness among standard and mini watermelons, respectively.
The present study evaluated two scions with a selection of 20 cucurbit rootstocks and observed no benefits in early season growth, yield, or phytonutrient content.
Only three of 20 rootstocks in each study produced marketable yields similar to the nongrafted treatments, and no grafted treatment produced higher yields than nongrafted 'Exclamation' or 'Extazy'.
Because grafted seedlings have an associated increase in cost and do not produce increased yields, grafting in these optimized farming systems and using fumigated soils does not offer an advantage in the absence of soilborne pathogens or other stressors that interfere with watermelon production.
