Bacterial fruit blotch of cucurbits (BFB) is caused by the gram-negative bacterium Acidovorax citrulli, whose populations can be distinguished into two genetically distinct groups, I and II.
Based on visual assessment of BFB severity on cucurbit seedlings and fruit after inoculation under greenhouse conditions, group I A.
citrulli strains have been reported to be moderately to highly virulent on several cucurbit hosts, whereas group II strains have exhibited high virulence on watermelon but low virulence on other cucurbits.
Additionally, group I strains are recovered from a range of cucurbit hosts, while group II strains are predominantly found on watermelon.
The goal of this research was to develop tools to characterize and rapidly distinguish group I and II A.
citrulli strains.
We first sought to determine whether quantification of A.
citrulli colonization of cucurbit seedling tissue reflects the differences between group I and II strains established by visual assessment of BFB symptom severity.
Spray inoculation of melon seedlings with cell suspensions containing approximately 1 x 10(4) CFU/ml resulted in significantly higher (P = 0.01) population growth of M6 (group I; mean area under population growth curve [AUPGC] = 43.73) than that of AAC00-1 (group II; mean AUPGC = 39.33) by 10 days after inoculation.
We also investigated the natural spread of bacterial cells and the resulting BFB incidence on watermelon and melon seedlings exposed to three group I and three group II A.
citrulli strains under mist chamber conditions.
After 5 days of exposure, the mean BFB incidence on melon seedlings exposed to representative group II A.
citrulli strains was significantly lower (25 and 3.98% in experiments 1 and 2, respectively) than on melon seedlings exposed to representative group I strains (94.44 and 76.11% in experiments 1 and 2, respectively), and on watermelon seedlings exposed to representative group I and II strains (70 to 93.33%).
Finally, we developed a polymerase chain reaction assay based on the putative type DI secretion effector gene, Aave_2166, to rapidly distinguish group I and II A.
citrulli strains.
This assay will be important for future epidemiological studies on BFB.
