Rootstock lines of wild watermelon (Citrullus lanatus subsp.
lanatus var.
citroides) with resistance to root-knot nematodes (RKN) were developed at the U.S.
Vegetable Laboratory.
Rootstock lines RKVL 301, RKVL 316, and RKVL 318 (RKVL = Root Knot Vegetable Laboratory) were compared to wild commercial cucurbit rootstocks and tinda (Praecitrullus fistulosus) for grafted seedless triploid watermelon (C.
lanatus subsp.
vulgaris var.
vulgaris) 'Tri-X 313' in fields infested with southern RKN (Meloidogyne incognita) in Charleston, SC.
RKVL wild watermelon rootstocks had lower (P<0.05) root galling (range: 9% to 16%) than non-grafted 'Tri-X 313' (41%), 'Emphasis' (86%), 'Strong Tosa' (99%), and wild tinda (96%) rootstocks.
The RKVL 318 rootstock produced higher fruit yield (29.5 kg/plot of 6 plants) (P<0.05) than all other rootstocks (mean = 11.0 kg/plot), except for self-grafted 'Tri-X 313' watermelon (21.5 kg/plot).
The three RKVL wild watermelon lines should be useful rootstocks for grafted watermelon, and useful germplasm sources for developing RKN-resistant watermelon breeding lines and cultivars.
In greenhouse tests, we evaluated reaction of 23 commercial cucurbit rootstocks and germplasm accessions including African horned cucumber (Cucumis metuliferus), pumpkiny(Cucurbita moschata), hybrid squash (C.
maxima x C.
moschata), and melon.
Melon, pumpkin, and squash exhibited the most severe root galling (range: 4.2-5.0 using a 1 to 5 rating scale where 1=no galls and 5=more than 80% of root system galled) in the greenhouse test.
African horned cucumber was moderately resistant to susceptible (galling range 2.6-3.2).
Several accessions of different cucurbit species were evaluated as rootstocks for grafted 'Athena' melon in a field infested with RKN (M.
incognita) in Charleston, SC.
All Cucurbita spp.
and C.
melo entries were highly susceptible to M.
incognita in the field tests as evidenced by high numbers of M.
incognita eggs in roots (up to 3600 eggs/gram fresh root).
African horned cucumber rootstocks supported the lowest RKN reproduction.
All rootstocks were compatible with the scion 'Athena' melon.
Additional studies are underway for developing African horned cucumber rootstocks that could be useful for managing RKN in grafted melon.
